Now, sweet lord,
you know the goodness I intend upon you.
Tell me but truly but then speak the truth,
do you not love my sister?
In honored love.
But have you never found my brother's way
to the forfended place?
No, by mine honor, madam.
I never shall endure her.
Dear my lord, be not familiar with her.
Fear me not.
She and the duke, her husband
I had rather lose the battle
than that sister should loosen him and me.
Our very loving sister, well be-met.
Sir, this I heard: the king is come to his daughter,
with others whom the rigor of our state forced to cry out.
Where I could not be honest, I never yet was valiant, for
Why is this reasoned?
Combine together 'gainst the enemy,
for these domestic particulars are not the question here.
Let's then determine
with the ancient of war on our proceeding.
Sister, you'll go with us?
No.
'Tis most convenient; I pray you, go with us.
O, ho, I know the riddle.
I will go.
If e'er your grace had speech with man so poor,
hear me one word.
I'll overtake you! Speak.
Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
If you have victory,
let the trumpet sound for him that brought it.
Wretched though I seem, I can produce a champion
that will prove what is avouched there.
If you miscarry, your business of the world hath so an end,
and machination ceases.
Fortune love you.
Stay till I have read the letter.
I was forbid it.
When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
and I'll appear again.
Why, fare thee well.
I will o'erlook your paper.
The enemy's in view; draw up your powers.
Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
by diligent discovery.
But your haste is now urged on you.
We will greet the time.
To both these sisters have I sworn my love,
each jealous of the other as the stung are of the adder.
Which of them shall I take?
Both? One?
Or neither?
Neither can be enjoyed if both remain alive.
To take the widow exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril.
And hardly shall I carry out my side,
her husband being alive.
Now, then, we'll use his countenance for the battle,
which, being done, let her who would be rid of him
devise his speedy taking off.
As for the mercy which he intends
to Lear and to Cordelia,
the battle done and they within our power
shall never see his pardon,
for my state stands on me to defend, not to debate.
Away, old man. Give me thy hand, away.
King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en.
Give me thy hand; come on.
No further, sir.
A man may rot even here.
What, in ill thoughts again?
Men must endure their going hence
even as their coming hither.
Ripeness is all.
Come on.
And that's true too.
Some officers, take them away.
Good guard until their greater pleasures
first be known that are to censure them.
We are not the first who, with best meaning,
have incurred the worst.
For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down.
Myself could else outfrown false fortune's frown.
Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
No, no, no, no!
Come, let's away to prison.
We two alone will sing like birds i' the cage.
When thou dost ask me blessing, I'll kneel down,
and ask of thee forgiveness.
So we'll live and pray and sing and tell old tales,
and laugh at gilded butterflies
and hear poor rogues talk of court news.
And we'll talk with them too, who loses and who wins,
who's in, who's out,
and take upon's the mystery of things,
as if we were God's spies.
And we'll wear out, in a walled prison,
packs and sects of the great ones that ebb and flow by the moon.
Take them away.
Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
the gods themselves throw incense.
Have I caught thee?
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven
and fire us hence like foxes.
Wipe thine eyes.
The good-years shall devour them,
flesh and fell, ere they shall make us weep.
We'll see 'em starve first.
Come.
Come hither, Captain. Hark.
Take thou this note.
Go follow them to prison.
One step, I have advanced thee.
If thou dost as this instructs thee,
thou dost make thy way to noble fortunes.
Know thou this: that men are as the time is.
To be tender-minded does not become a sword.
Thy great employment will not bear question.
Either say thou'lt do 't, or thrive by other means.
I'll do it, my lord.
About it, and write happy when thou hast done.
Mark, I say, instantly,
and carry it so as I have set it down.
I cannot draw a cart nor eat dried oats.
If it be man's work, I'll do it.
Sir, you have shown today your valiant strain,
and fortune led you well.
You have the captives
who were the opposites of this day's strife.
I do require them of you, so to use them
as we shall find their merits and our safety
may equally determine.
Sir, I thought it fit to send the old and miserable king
to some retention and appointed guard,
whose age had charms in it, whose title more,
to pluck the common bosom on his side
an turn our impressed lances in our eyes
which do command them.
With him I sent the queen, my reason all the same.
And they are ready tomorrow, or at further space,
to appear where you shall hold your session.
Sir, by your patience, I hold you
but a subject of this war, not as a brother.
That's as we list to grace him.
Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded,
'ere you spoke so far.
He hath led our powers,
bore the commission of my place and person,
the which immediacy may well stand up
and call itself your brother.
Not so hot.
In his own grace, he doth exalt himself
more than in your addition.
In my rights, by me invested, he compeers the best.
That were the most if he should husband you.
Jesters do oft prove prophets.
Holla, holla!
That eye that told you so looked but a-squint.
Lady, I am not well,
else't I should answer from a full-flowing stomach.
General, take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony.
Dispose of them, of me.
The walls is thine.
Witness the world
that I create thee here my lord and master.
Mean you to enjoy him?
The let-alone lies not in your good will.
Nor in thine, lord.
Half-blooded fellow, yes.
Let the drum strike and prove my title thine.
Stay yet; hear reason.
Edmund, I arrest thee on capital treason
and, in thy attaint, this gilded serpent.
For your claim, fair sister,
I bar it in the interest of my wife.
'Tis she is subcontracted to this lord,
and I, her husband, contradict your bans.
If you would marry, make your love to me;
my lady is bespoke.
An interlude!
Thou art armed, Gloucester.
Let the trumpet sound.
If none appear to prove upon thy person
thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
there is my pledge:
I'll make it on thy heart 'ere I taste bread,
thou art in nothing less than I have here proclaimed thee.
Sick, O, sick!
If not, I'll ne'er trust medicine.
There's my exchange.
What in the world he is that names me traitor,
villain-like, he lies.
Call by thy trumpet.
He that dares approach on him, on you, who not
I will maintain my truth and honor firmly.
A herald, ho!
Trust to thy single virtue,
for thy soldiers, all levied in my name,
have, in my name, took their discharge.
My sickness grows upon me.
She is not well; convey her to my tent.
Come hither, herald.
Let the trumpet sound, and read out this.
"If any man of quality or degree within the lists of the army
"will maintain upon Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloucester,
"that he is a manifold traitor,
"let him appear by the third sound of the trumpet.
He is bold in his defense."
Sound!
Again!
Ask him his purposes
and why he appears upon this call o' the trumpet.
What are you:
your name, your quality,
and why you answer this present summons?
Know, my name is lost,
by treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit.
Yet am I noble as the adversary I come to cope.
Which is that adversary?
What's he that speaks for Edmund, Earl of Gloucester?
Himself. What say'st thou to him?
Draw thy sword that, if my speech offend a noble heart,
thy arm may do thee justice.
Here is mine.
Behold, it is the privilege
of mine honors, my oath, and my profession.
I protest, maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence
despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,
thy valor and thy heart, thou art a traitor,
false to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
conspirant 'gainst this high-illustrious prince;
and, from the extremist upward of thy head
to the descent and dust below thy foot,
a most toad-spotted traitor.
Say thou "no,"
this sword, this arm, and my best spirits
are bent to prove upon thy heart,
whereto I speak, thou liest.
In wisdom, I should ask thy name.
But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike
and that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
what safe and nicely I might well delay
by rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn.
Back do I toss these treasons to thy head
with the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart;
which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,
this sword of mine shall give them instant way,
where they shall rest forever.
Trumpets, speak.
Save him. Save him!
This is practice, Gloucester.
By the laws of war, thou wast not bound
to answer an unknown opposite.
Thou art not vanquished but cozened and beguiled.
Shut your mouth, dame.
Or with this paper shall I stop it.
Hold, sir.
Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.
No tearing, lady.
I perceive you know it.
Say, if I do, the laws are mine, not thine.
Who can arraign me for it?
Most monstrous.
Oh, know'st thou this paper?
Ask me not what I know.
Go after her. She's desperate; govern her.
What you have charged me with, that have I done,
and more, much more.
The time will bring it out.
'Tis past, and so am I.
But what art thou that hast this fortune on me?
If thou art noble, I do forgive thee.
I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund.
If more, the more thou hast wronged me.
My name is Edgar and thy father's son.
The gods are just
and, of our pleasant vices, make instruments to plague us.
The dark and vicious place where thee he got
cost him his eyes.
Thou hast spoken right; 'tis true.
The wheel is come full circle.
I am here.
Methought thy very gait did prophesy a royal nobleness.
I must embrace thee.
Let sorrow split my heart
if ever I did hate thee or thy father.
Worthy prince, I know it.
Where have you hid yourself?
How have you known the miseries of your father?
By nursing them, my lord.
List a brief tale, and when 'tis told,
O, that my heart would burst.
The bloody proclamation to escape
that followed me so near
O, our lives' sweetness.
That we the pain of death hourly would die
rather than die at once
led me to move into a madman's rags,
to assume a semblance that very dogs disdained.
And in this habit met I my father
with his bleeding rings their precious stones new lost.
Became his guide, led him, begged for him,
saved him from despair.
Never fault! revealed myself unto him
until some half-hour past, when I was armed.
Not sure, though hoping, of this good success,
I asked his blessing and told him all my pilgrimage.
But his flawed heart, alack,
too weak the conflict to support,
'twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief, burst smilingly.
Help, help, oh, help!
What kind of help? Speak, man.
What means this bloody knife?
'Tis hot; it smokes.
It came even from the heart of
she's dead!
Who dead? Speak, man.
Your lady, sir, your lady.
And her sister by her is poisoned.
She confesses it.
I was contracted to them both.
All three now marry in an instant.
Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead.
This judgment of the heavens, which makes us tremble,
touches us not with pity.
Here comes Kent.
Oh, is this he?
The time will not allow the compliment
which very manners urges.
I am come to bid my king and master aye good night.
Is he not here?
Great thing of us forgot.
Speak, Edmund. Where's the king?
And where's Cordelia?
Yet Edmund was beloved.
The one, the other poisoned for my sake
and after slew herself.
I pant for life.
Some good I mean to do, despite of mine own nature.
Quickly send be brief in it to the castle,
for my writ is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia.
Nay, send in time.
To who, my lord? Who has the office?
Send thy token of reprieve.
Well thought on.
Take my sword; give it the captain.
Haste thee, for thy life.
He hath commission from thy wife and me
to hang Cordelia in the prison
and to lay the blame upon her own despair,
that she fordid herself.
The gods defend her.
Bear him hence awhile.
Howl!
Howl, howl!
O, you are men of stones!
Had I your tongues and eyes, I'd use them so
that heaven's vault should crack!
She's gone forever.
I know when one is dead and when one lives.
She's dead as earth.
Lend me a looking-glass.
If that her breath should mist or stain the stone,
why, then she lives.
Is this the promised end?
Or image of that horror?
Fall, and cease.
This feather stirs; she lives!
If it be so, it is a chance
which does redeem all sorrows that ever I have felt.
O my good master!
Prithee, away.
'Tis noble Kent, your friend.
A plague upon you murderers, traitors all!
I might have saved her.
Now she's gone forever.
Cordelia, Cordelia.
Stay a little.
Ha!
What is't thou say'st?
Her voice was ever soft, gentle, and low,
an excellent thing in woman.
I killed the slave that was a-hanging thee.
'Tis true, my lords, he did.
Did I not, fellow?
I have known the day,
with my good biting falchion, I'd have made them skip.
I am old now,
and these same crosses spoil me.
Who are you?
Mine eyes are not o' the best; I'll tell you straight.
If fortune brag of two she loved and hated,
one of them, we behold.
This is a dull sight.
Are you not Kent?
The same, your servant Kent.
Where is your servant Caius?
He's a good fellow.
He'll strike, and quickly too.
He's dead and rotten.
No, my good lord; I am the very man.
I'll see that straight.
That, from your first of difference and decay,
have followed your sad steps.
You are welcome hither.
Nor no man else.
All's cheerless, dark, and deadly.
Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves
and desperately are dead.
Aye, so I think.
He knows not what he says.
And vain is it that we present us to him.
Very bootless.
Edmund is dead, my lord.
That's but a trifle here.
You lords and noble friends, know our intent.
What comfort to this great decay may come shall be applied.
For us we will resign,
during the life of this old majesty,
to him our absolute power you, to your rights
with boot and such addition
as your honors have more than merited.
All friends shall taste the wages of their virtue
and all foes the cup of their deservings.
O, see, see.
My poor fool is hanged.
No.
No, no life.
Why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life
and thou no breath at all?
Thou'lt come no more
never,
never, never,
never!
Pray you, undo this button.
Thank you, sir.
Do you see this?
Look on her, look, her lips.
Look there! Look there!
He faints!
My lord, my lord!
Break, heart; I prithee, break!
Look up, my lord.
Vex not his ghost.
O, let him pass.
He hates him that would upon the rack
of this tough world stretch him out longer.
He is gone, indeed.
The wonder is he hath endured so long.
He but usurped his life.
Bear them from hence.
Our present business is general woe.
Friends of my soul, you twain rule in this realm
and the gored state sustain.
I have a journey, sir, shortly to go.
My master calls me; I must not say no.
The weight of this sad time, we must obey.
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
The oldest hath borne most.
We that are young
shall never see so much, nor live so long.